ADD: Dynamic methods in ruby (#180)
incubyte/incubyte.github.io: content/blog/dynamic-method.md

+++
title = "Dynamic method in ruby"
slug = "dynamic-method"
date = 2023-10-27T13:31:36+05:30
image = "/images/2023/10/methodmissing.jpg"
draft = false
authors = ["Nitin Rajkumar"]
description = "Dynamic and ghost methods in ruby"
tags = ["Software Craftsmanship", "GraphQL"]
categories = ["Software Craftsmanship", "Ruby", "Dynamic Dispatch", "Ghost Methods"]
type = ""
+++

In Ruby, the dynamic nature of method dispatch is one of its key features. Method calls are resolved at runtime based on the actual type of the object. This flexibility allows for polymorphic and dynamic behavior
#### Dynamic Dispatch
```ruby
	class Number
		def square(argument)
			argument ** 2
		end
		def cube(argument)
			argument ** 3
		end
	end
	number = Number.new
	number.square(3) #=> 9
```

Method can be called using dot notation but this restricts making the method call being dynamic. 

> There is another way to call a method that is using `send`. It accepts method name and it's arguments as arguments.

Reviewer: the class.method("method_name").call should also be included here and a one liner about how it differs from send

> There is another way to call a method that is using `send`. It accepts method name and it's arguments as arguments.

Reviewer: instead of "it's arguments as arguments"

"the method's arguments as it own arguments"

```ruby
	number.send(:square, 3) #=> 9
```
Since the method name is an argument it can be replaced by any method name during runtime.
```ruby
puts "Enter a number:" 
user_input = gets.chomp
puts "Enter the method name:" 
method_name = gets.chomp
number.send(method_name.to_sym, 4) #=> 16

```
`to_sym is used to convert string to symbol but method name can be passed as string.`
Using send to dispatch a method has a downside when it comes to privacy concerns as it invokes even a private method of the class without throwing an error. 
This can be prevented using by using `public_send`.

We can not only call methods during runtime but also define methods during runtime.

#### Dynamic Methods
A method can be defined using `define_method` at the run time.
```ruby
  class Number
    define_component(method_name, argument, power)
  	define_method(method_name) do |argument, power|
  		argument ** power
  	end
    end
  end
	number = Number.new
	number.define_component(square,4, 2) #=> 16
	number.define_component(cube,4, 3) #=> 64
```

There is another way of defining methods dynamically using method_missing.

### Ghost Method

> What happens when you call a method on an object that is not yet defined. A method missing error is displayed. What happens internally is ruby goes right and up and checks from the ancestor chain up till `BasicObject` and when the method is not found it transfers the call to `method_missing` in `BasicObject` class, which returns `NoMethodError`.

Reviewer: What happens when you call a method on an object that is not yet defined. A method missing error is displayed. What happens internally is ruby goes right and up and checks from the ancestor chain up till `BasicObject` and when the method is not found it transfers the call to `method_missing` in `BasicObject` class, which returns `NoMethodError`.

```suggestion
What happens when you call a method on an object that is not yet defined. A method missing error is displayed. What happens internally is ruby goes up the object hierarchy and checks up till `BasicObject` and when the method is not found it transfers the call to `method_missing` in `BasicObject` class, which returns `NoMethodError`.
```
